Add RFD for Agent Inventory UI (#59569)
gravitational/teleport: rfd/0229-agent-inventory-ui.md

state: draft
---

# RFD 0229 - Agent Inventory UI

## Required Approvals

- Engineering: @zmb3 @fspmarshall
- Product: @roraback

## What

A page in the Web UI that lists connected agents and their details, with options to search and filter through them.

## Why

Currently, the only way to list agents is via the `tctl inventory list` CLI command, this can be quite cumbersome for users 
and as a result limits the visibility cluster administrators have into their infrastructure. Exposing this information in the 
Web UI would greatly improve the user experience and make it easier for cluster administrators to do things like identify agents
still running old versions of Teleport and need to be updated.

## Details

### Implementation

The first version of this feature will primarily focus on adding the existing `tctl inventory` functionality to the Web UI and use
most of the same underlying backend API.

#### Web Endpoint

A new `/webapi/sites/:site/inventory` will be used by the Web UI to fetch a paginated list of agents, this endpoint will support 
various query parameters for pagination and filtering, including:

- `search`: Filter by hostname.

> - `versions`: Filter to only return agents running the specified Teleport version(s).

Reviewer: Is this just for a specific version?

`tctl inventory ls` has options for `--exact-version`, `--newer-than`, and `--older-than`, which are helpful for finding outdated agents.

Author: This would let you select one or more from the list of versions that are currently found on your argents. It seemed a little excessive to replicate the `tctl` filters exactly in the UI as that would mean 3 different controls in the UI just for version filtering. I'll sync with @roraback and see if we can come up with something in the middle.

> - `upgraders`: Filter to only return agents using the specified external upgrader(s).

Reviewer: What about filtering by updater group (AKA `--updater-group` in `tctl`)?

The response will be a JSON object containing the page of agents requested.

##### Example response:

```json
{
  "agents": [
    {
      "serverId": "1",
      "hostname": "server1",
      "version": "16.1.3",
      "services": ["ssh", "db", "desktop"],
    },
    {
      "serverId": "2",
      "name": "kube1",
      "version": "16.5.4",
      "services": ["kube"],
      "upgrader": "Upgrader v2",
    },
    {
      "serverId": "3",
      "hostname": "server3",
      "version": "16.1.3",
      "services": ["ssh"],
    },
  ],
  "uniqueVersions": ["16.1.3", "16.5.4"],
  "totalCount": 3,

>   "startKey": "",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "nextKey": "",
```

Right?

}
```

#### Performance

The current implementation of `tctl inventory ls` bypasses the cache entirely and reads the instances directly from the backend.
This was done intentionally because caching instances in the traditional way would nearly double the number of backend reads done
on startup while populating the cache, with insufficient read capacity this could easily lead to issues like degraded performance
throughout the entire cluster, or possibly even break the cluster entirely due to a self-propagating loop of errors where
the cache never gets healthy.

> Instances still need to be cached if exposed to the Web UI to maintain performance and prevent constant backend reads, so to

Reviewer: How will we purge old instances that stop heartbeating from the cache?

prevent the aforementioned issues, instances will be cached in a separate "lazy" cache with rate-limited reads that is
initialized after the primary cache has. This `InstancesCache` will wait for the primary cache to be ready and healthy, and only
then begin populating itself with the instances from the backend. Its reads from the backend will be rate-limited variably, 
based on the size of the cluster which will be derived from the size of the primary cache. Larger clusters (which can be assumed
to have more bandwidth) will have more lenient rate-limits in order to prevent it from taking too long to populate.

Aggregate counters such us the total number of up-to-date agents, total number of each service, etc. will be their own separate
fields in the cache and tallied up during initialization, and updated as needed during create/edit/delete operations. All 
the unique version numbers of Teleport found running on agents will also be collected, as this will be to build the version
filtering options in the Web UI.

Any requests made for instances will be rejected until the `InstancesCache` is initialized and healthy.

#### UX

> ![](assets/0229-agent-inventory-mockup.png)

Reviewer: Are we thinking infinite scroll like the resources page, or a dedicated "next page" button?

Reviewer 2: Let's go with infinite scroll

*The above mockup is not finalized and may differ slightly from the implemented feature.

The new `Agent Inventory` page will be available in the Web UI under the `Zero Trust Access` navigation section. Users who don't
have `list` permissions for the `instance` resource kind will not have permission to list instances and won't see the navigation

> item.

Reviewer: This should only be the case if "feature hiding" is enabled.

Otherwise I would expect the page to still show up in the nav, with a message on top saying "you aren't seeing any results because you lack instance.list permissions"

      "version": "16.1.3",
      "services": ["ssh", "db", "desktop"],
      "updaterGroup": "group1",
    },
    {
      "id": "2",
      "name": "kube1",
      "version": "16.5.4",
      "services": ["kube"],
      "upgrader": "kube",
      "upgraderVersion": "v2",
      "updaterGroup": "group2",
    },
    {
      "id": "3",
      "name": "server2",
      "version": "16.1.3",
      "services": ["ssh"],
      "updaterGroup": "group1",
    },
    {
      "id": "3",
      "name": "bot1",
      "version": "16.1.3",
      "isBot": true,
    },
  ],
  "totalCount": 4,
  "startKey": "",
}
```

#### RPC Service and Proto messages

```protobuf
service InstanceService {
  // ListInstances returns a page of Agents and Bot Instances.
  rpc ListInstances(ListInstancesRequest) returns (ListInstancesResponse);
}

// ListInstancesRequest is the request for listing instances.
message ListInstancesRequest {
  // page_size is the size of the page to return.
  int32 page_size = 1;
  // page_token is the next_page_token value returned from a previous ListInstances request, if any.
  string page_token = 2;
  // filters specify search criteria to limit which instances should be returned.

>   ListInstancesFilters filters = 3;

Reviewer 3: Having an optional filter field in the request is consistent with how other APIs have been implementing it upto this point. 

This should likely be singular and either `optional` or default all inclusive.

to have more bandwidth) will have more lenient rate-limits in order to prevent it from taking too long to populate.

Aggregate counters such as the total number of up-to-date agents, total number of each service, etc. will be their own separate
fields in the cache and tallied up during initialization, and updated as needed during create/edit/delete operations.

The cache will hook into the backend events watcher and watch for `Instances` events and update the cache accordingly whenever
an update is detected (such as an instance no longer being connected). This cache will live in auth and the data will be exposed to
the proxy via a new RPC service with a `ListInstances()` method which will build the page of instances by streaming from the 
instances cache and bot instances cache (which is already implemented). To achieve this, the `MergeStreams` utility will be used
to iterate through both caches simultaneously and use a compare function that compares the names of the instances to ensure that 
the returned page is based on alphabetical order. The `next_key` will consist of the next keys in each cache separated by a comma,

> eg. `"server3,bot2"`, similar to the existing implementation for dual notifications streaming.

Author: > We're merging the streams by name, what possible reason is there to need to keep track of where we are in each stream?

The streams are being merged on the spot while fetching the list of agents and `bot_instances`, the merging here in practice is essentially just "iterate through 2 lists simultaneously to construct a combined output." Are you maybe understanding it as meaning we are creating and storing a separate merged list that contains both agents and instances and then iterating through that already-combined stream during fetch?

The agents and `bot_instances` are stored in separate lists in their respective caches, and since we are iterating through two different streams, we need to keep track of where we left off in each one of them so that we can be sure to skip items that have already been consumed in previous pages. See the `MergeStreams` logic currently in use to fetch notifications for reference.

> The only consequence of that would be that we actually potentially skip new items added between the return from the previous page and the new page being fetched.

This is already a limitation of all our existing pagination logic since the `nextKey` would be determined prior to the new item being added, so any item added to the current page after the response would be excluded from both the current page and the next page.

> If the next bot coming is sonny and the next agent coming is sandra and we close the page, the next page should start from sandra for both, and keeping track of the fact that the next bot was supposed to be sonny is at best useless and at worst will end up skipping the newly added seal bot.

I'm not sure I fully understand, there is no `bot_instance` named `sandra`, so it would only be relevant as a `startKey` for agents. Do you just mean to use `sandra` as the alphabetical start point for both (ie. even it doesn't exist, just return the items that would alphabetically come after `sandra`)?

  int32 page_size = 1;
  // page_token is the next_page_token value returned from a previous ListUnifiedInstances request, if any.
  string page_token = 2;
  // filters specify optional search criteria to limit which instances should be returned.
  ListUnifiedInstancesFilter filter = 3;
}

// ListUnifiedInstancesResponse is the response from listing instances.
message ListUnifiedInstancesResponse {
  // items is the list of instances (teleport or bot instances) returned.
  repeated UnifiedInstanceItem items = 1;
  // next_page_token contains the next page token to use as the start key for the next page of instances.
  string next_page_token = 2;
}

// ListUnifiedInstancesFilter provides a mechanism to refine ListUnifiedInstances results.
message ListUnifiedInstancesFilter {
  // search is a basic string search query which will filter results by name (hostname for teleport instances, bot name for bot instances).
  string search = 1;
  // advanced_search is an advanced search query using predicate language.
  string advanced_search = 2;
  // kinds is the kinds of instances to return. If ommitted, both teleport instances and bot instances will be returned.

>   repeated string kinds = 3;

Reviewer 4: Suggestion: Rename this to instance_type. 

Reasoning: I think it would reduce confusion. ListUnifiedResources uses kinds to denote the teleport resources, which here are referred to as services.

---
authors: Yassine Bounekhla (yassine@goteleport.com)
state: draft
---

# RFD 0229 - Instances Inventory UI

## Required Approvals

- Engineering: @zmb3 @fspmarshall
- Product: @roraback

## What

A page in the Web UI that lists connected instances along with their details, with options to search and filter through them.

## Why

Currently, the only way to list agents is via the `tctl inventory list` and `tctl bots instances ls` (RFD 222) CLI commands, this can
be quite cumbersome for users and as a result limits the visibility cluster administrators have into their infrastructure. Exposing
this information in the Web UI would greatly improve the user experience and make it easier for cluster administrators to do

> things like identify instances still running old versions of Teleport and need to be updated.

Author: This functionality is already available via `tctl inventory ls` (which supports filters like `--older-than` to filter by version for example). Do you mean `tsh`?

## Details

### Implementation

The first version of this feature will primarily focus on adding the existing `tctl inventory` and `tctl bots instances` functionality
to the Web UI and use most of the same underlying backend API. Both agents and bot instances will be stored in a sorted cache ordered alphabetically
by name.

#### Web Endpoint

A new `/webapi/sites/:site/instances` will be used by the Web UI to fetch a paginated list of instances, this endpoint will support
various query parameters for pagination and filtering, including:

> - `search`: Filter by hostname.

Author: It will be by hostname or instance ID.

- `query`: Filter by a predicate language expression.
- `services`: Filter to only return agents running the specified service(s).

> - `upgraders`: Filter to only return agents using the specified external upgrader(s).

Reviewer 4: Are services and upgraders limited to agents? 
```suggestion
- `services`: Filter to only return instances running the specified service(s).
- `upgraders`: Filter to only return instances using the specified external upgrader(s).
```

##### Example response:

```json
{
  "instances": [
    {
      "id": "1",
      "type": "agent",
      "agent": {
        "name": "server1",
        "version": "16.1.3",
        "services": ["ssh", "db", "desktop"],
        "upgrader": {
          "type": "unit",
          "version": "v2",
          "group": "group1"
        }
      }
    },
    {
      "id": "2",
      "type": "agent",
      "agent": {
        "name": "kube1",
        "version": "16.5.4",
        "services": ["kube"],
        "upgrader": {
          "type": "kube",
          "version": "v2",
          "group": "group1"
        }
      }
    },
    {
      "id": "3",
      "type": "bot",
      "bot": {
        "name": "bot1",
        "version": "16.1.3",
        "service": "kubernetes",
        "health": "Unknown"
      }
    },
    {
      "id": "4",
      "type": "agent",
      "agent": {
        "name": "agent1",
        "version": "16.1.3",
        "services": ["kube"],
        "upgrader": {
          "type": "kube",
          "version": "v2",
          "group": "group2"
        }
      }
    }
  ],
  "updaterGroups": ["group1", "group2"],

>   "totalCount": 4,

Reviewer 4: Didn't we drop support for counting?

  string page_token = 2;
  // filters specify optional search criteria to limit which instances should be returned.
  ListUnifiedInstancesFilter filter = 3;
}

// ListUnifiedInstancesResponse is the response from listing instances.
message ListUnifiedInstancesResponse {
  // items is the list of instances (agents or bot instances) returned.
  repeated UnifiedInstanceItem items = 1;
  // next_page_token contains the next page token to use as the start key for the next page of instances.
  string next_page_token = 2;
}

// ListUnifiedInstancesFilter provides a mechanism to refine ListUnifiedInstances results.
message ListUnifiedInstancesFilter {
  // search is a basic string search query which will filter results by name (hostname for agents, bot name for bot instances).
  string search = 1;
  // advanced_search is an advanced search query using predicate language.
  string advanced_search = 2;
  // kinds is the kinds of instances to return. If ommitted, both agent instances and bot instances will be returned.
  repeated string kinds = 3;
  // services is the list of services to filter agents by. Only applicable to agent instances.

>   repeated string services = 4;

Reviewer 4: Should this only be limited to teleport instances? What if I want to filter bots by the services they've enabled?

Author: Could you specify what you mean? Looking at the bot instance type, I don't see that they contain a list of enabled services that we'd be able to access and filter by

Reviewer 5: 👍  Agree with Nick here, I don't think we need to worry about this too much for Bot Instances and if anything it would introduce a lot of complexity for the UI elements here. I haven't read the rest of the RFD, but, if we need something in this field for Bot Instances, perhaps we just say "Bot" is the service type.

> the services that agents run and the fact the [name of a service is arbitrary and user-defined](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/a79aea3982e7be9bb777b42e48cd4070b7c3bc76/api/proto/teleport/machineid/v1/bot_instance.proto#L195C1-L197C2).

If we were to display bot instance services/support filtering, I'd likely recommend that we show the "type" of the services rather than their names.

> From my understanding the services for bots are more arbitrary and user-defined

That's correct.

  // updater_groups is the list of updater groups to filter instances by. Only applicable to agent instances.
  repeated string updater_groups = 5;
  // upgraders is the list of upgraders to filter instances by. Only applicable to agent instances.

>   repeated string upgraders = 6;

Reviewer 4: What measures will we put in place such that if/when tbot support managed updated, i.e. https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/60478/files, that these apply to bots as well?

Author: There don't need to be any special measures put in place now, the service logic will just need to be updated to also filter bot instances by it if/when managed updates are added for them. I'll remove the "only applicable to..." part of the comment.

The new `Instances Inventory` page will be available in the Web UI under the `Zero Trust Access` navigation section.

The top of the page will contain aggregate metrics including the total number of up-to-date and out-of-date agents, number of
agents using externally managed upgrades and their upgraders, and total active services.

The list of instances will be a paginated list with infinite scroll support, and contain columns for hostname,
version, services, and external upgrader (if any). A search bar will be available to use in either basic mode (default),
which searches by hostname/intstance ID, or advanced mode using predicate language to perform queries. Where applicable, the predicate
language query functions will be kept consistent with those that can be used on the Bot Instances dashboard.

The `versions` UI filter control will contain 4 preset options:

- `Up-to-date`: Filter for instances running the current version of the cluster (eg. `18.2.4`).
- `Patch available`: Filter for instances running the same major version, but a lower minor version (eg. `>=18.0.0`)
- `Upgrade required`: Filter for instances running 1 major version behind. (eg. `>=17.0.0 && <18.0.0`).

> - `Unsupported`: Filter for instances running more than 2 major versions behind, or more than 1 major version ahead. (eg. `<17.0.0 && >=19.0.0`)

Reviewer 4: Can we include a preset(s) option for instances running less than or equal to some Teleport version or instances running a known vulnerable version of Teleport? For example, during the recent security incident customers were finding it difficult to identify any unpatched instances of Teleport. I realize this is easily achievable via a predicate expression from the advanced search option, but it seems to me that a preset for this case would be extremely valuable to a cluster admin.

      "type": "agent",
      "agent": {
        "name": "server1",
        "version": "16.1.3",
        "services": ["ssh", "db", "desktop"],
        "upgrader": {
          "type": "unit",
          "version": "v2",
          "group": "group1"
        }
      }
    },
    {
      "id": "2",
      "type": "agent",
      "agent": {
        "name": "kube1",
        "version": "16.5.4",
        "services": ["kube"],
        "upgrader": {
          "type": "kube",
          "version": "v2",
          "group": "group1"
        }
      }
    },
    {
      "id": "3",
      "type": "bot",
      "bot": {
        "name": "bot1",
        "version": "16.1.3",
        "service": "kubernetes",
        "health": "Unknown"
      }
    },
    {
      "id": "4",
      "type": "agent",
      "agent": {
        "name": "agent1",
        "version": "16.1.3",
        "services": ["kube"],
        "upgrader": {
          "type": "kube",
          "version": "v2",
          "group": "group2"
        }
      }
    }
  ],
  "totalCount": 4,
  "startKey": ""
}
```

#### RPC Service and Proto messages

```protobuf
service InventoryService {
  // ListInstances returns a page of Agents and Bot Instances.

>   rpc ListInstances(ListInstancesRequest) returns (ListInstancesResponse);

Reviewer 6: nit: given that we already use the convention of `Instance` meaning "agent instance" in a lot of places, could we instead name this something like `ListUnifiedInstances`?  In addition to disambiguating from any future `ListInstances` API for the `Instance` type, that would also have the upside of mirroring the naming convention used by `ListUnifiedResources`, which is kind of the access resource equivalent of this API.

>   rpc ListInstances(ListInstancesRequest) returns (ListInstancesResponse);

Reviewer 7: We have already used this pattern for workload identities and access lists where only sorting by name is available if the cache is unhealthy, we could do the same here (but supporting a fallback is a little more awkward, admittedly).

}

// ListInstancesRequest is the request for listing instances.
message ListInstancesRequest {
  // page_size is the size of the page to return.
  int32 page_size = 1;
  // page_token is the next_page_token value returned from a previous ListInstances request, if any.
  string page_token = 2;
  // filters specify optional search criteria to limit which instances should be returned.
  ListInstancesFilter filter = 3;
}

// ListInstancesResponse is the response from listing instances.
message ListInstancesResponse {
  // instances is the instances returned.
  repeated Instance instances = 1;
  // next_page_token contains the next page token to use as the start key for the next page of instances.
  string next_page_token = 2;
  // total_count is the total number of agents and bot instances in the cache.

>   int32 total_count = 3;

Reviewer 6: Comments should call out the fact that including a total count is only sane because this API refuses requests when the cache is unhealthy.  We do not want people looking at this and thinking it's a pattern they should copy.  99% of the time, including a total count is a *very very* bad idea from a scaling perspective.

Reviewer 7: Specifically, if we ever want to apply RBAC filtering to instances or bot instances we are going to be forced to walk through the whole list on every request, just to calculate the total count.

Reviewer 6: You're absolutely right.  I hadn't considered RBAC filtering.  We should probably omit `total_count` entirely.
